Volkswagen Top Executives Were Briefed on Emissions
German auto maker also disputes allegations it was tardy in disclosing scandal news
Volkswagen filed a defense with a German district court Tuesday, rejecting allegations that the company failed to inform financial markets in a timely manner. ENLARGE
Volkswagen filed a defense with a German district court Tuesday, rejecting allegations that the company failed to inform financial markets in a timely manner. PHOTO: MICHAEL PROBST/
BERLIN— Volkswagen AG said former Chief Executive Martin Winterkorn and Herbert Diess, chief of Volkswagen’s passenger cars division, were briefed internally about issues related to elevated diesel emissions on U.S. vehicles, months before it publicly acknowledged the company had installed software that duped emissions tests on millions cars sold globally.

Volkswagen didn’t disclose specific details of that meeting, saying only it was about the “diesel issue,” and that it was part of its internal probe into the matter. That makes it still difficult to tell whether the company’s top management was aware of the significance of the issue, and whether they should have publicly disclosed any knowledge earlier than they did.

The disclosure came as Volkswagen filed a defense with a German district court Tuesday, rejecting allegations that the company failed to inform financial markets in a timely manner about potential liabilities from its emissions-cheating affair and published new details about when top management was informed about the issue.

“It is not clear whether there [sic] participants understood already at this point in time that the change in the software violated U.S. environmental regulations,” Volkswagen said in the statement. “Mr. Winterkorn asked for further clarification of the issue.”

Volkswagen said it felt compelled to publish the defense and a more detailed chronology of events in response to the publication of internal documents leaked to German media that suggest Mr. Winterkorn knew as early as May 23, 2014, about the cheating software.

The question is important and the answer could have consequences not only for Messrs. Winterkorn and Diess, but also for Hans Dieter Pötsch, the company’s chairman, who was chief finance officer at the time.

At issue is whether Volkswagen’s management waited too long to inform financial markets of potential liabilities that would later cause a massive erosion of the company’s share price and market value.

Some investors have complained that Volkswagen management withheld information from financial markets about the diesel fraud and are seeking damages. Separately, Germany’s financial markets watchdog, BaFin, is conducting an investigation into whether Volkswagen failed to inform markets in a timely fashion.

Volkswagen said in its defense that technicians informed the company’s legal department and lawyers from Kirkland & Ellis LLP on Sept. 3, 2015, that modification of the engine control software “constituted a prohibited defeat device under U.S. law.”

The company informed the California Air Resources Board and the Environmental Protection Agency on Sept. 3. A day later, Mr. Winterkorn was informed.

At this point, Volkswagen explained in its statement, the company’s management believed the matter was restricted to a relatively small number of vehicles in the U.S. Based on past cases, Volkswagen’s lawyers believed the matter could be resolved at little cost by disclosing the software modification, agreeing on measures with U.S. authorities to make the vehicles compliant, and paying potential fines in line with past cases, which were about $91 per vehicle.

Volkswagen said it wasn’t aware of the full breadth of the scandal until the EPA released its notice of violation Sept. 18, citing potential fines of $37,000 per vehicle and the subsequent discovery that the software was installed on nearly 11 million vehicles world-wide.

Volkswagen said the assessment of the “concrete global risks” took several days. The company issued an ad hoc statement to financial markets Sept. 22.

“After careful examination by internal and external legal experts, the company confirms its belief that its management board duly fulfilled its disclosure obligation under German capital markets law,” Volkswagen said in its statement