BUSINESS
Volkswagen Emissions Scandal Relates to 11 Million Cars
Auto maker sets aside $7.27 billion to cover potential costs
The Volkswagen emissions scandal worsened Tuesday as the German auto maker said up to 11 million vehicles world-wide could be affected by software allegedly used to cheat U.S. emissions tests and it announced plans to set aside $7.27 billion to cover related costs. Here are five things about the scandal. Photo: Reuters
By WILLIAM BOSTON and  SARAH SLOAT
Updated Sept. 22, 2015 11:32 a.m. ET
743 COMMENTS
Volkswagen AG’s emissions crisis deepened on Tuesday as the company revealed as many as 11 million vehicles world-wide contain the software allegedly used to cheat emissions tests and disclosed it would take a €6.5 billion ($7.27 billion) charge to earnings and cut its full-year outlook.

The company added that internal investigations have found the engine-management software is installed in diesel-powered vehicles in other Volkswagen owned brands, but may not have any effect. Volkswagen owns Porsche, Audi, and Skoda, among other brands.

Volkswagen Chief Executive Martin Winterkorn, whose future as CEO has been cast into doubt by the scandal, again on Tuesday apologized in a video message. “Millions of people in the world trust our brand, our cars and our technology,” he said. “I am endlessly sorry that we have betrayed that trust.”

Advertisement

Mr. Winterkorn promised the company would soon clarify the origin and extent of the issue. “Everything will be put on the table at this time, as quickly, thoroughly and transparently as possible,” he said.

Related Video
Volkswagen is halting American sales of popular diesel-powered cars and issued an apology for violating consumers' trust. WSJ's Mike Spector reports. Photo: Getty
Volkswagen shares plunged Tuesday in Frankfurt after the profit warning and were off nearly 17% at €112.20 ($124.85). Its shares were 19% lower on Monday.

Mr. Winterkorn on Tuesday acknowledged “misconduct.” The company’s U.S. chief Michael Horn on Monday said: “Our company was dishonest with the [Environmental Protection Agency], and the California Air Resources Board, and with all of you,” according to a video of a Volkswagen event in New York, adding, “we’ve totally screwed up.”

Advertisement

The company said the discrepancies relate to diesel-powered vehicles with engines known as Type EA 189 engines. It said “a noticeable deviation between bench test results and actual road use was established solely for this type of engine.”

“Volkswagen is working intensely to eliminate these deviations through technical measures,” it added.


Last Friday, U.S. environmental authorities alleged Volkswagen had installed software in nearly 500,000 cars that made them appear to run cleaner in emissions tests than they do on the road. The company hasn’t contested the accusation, and Mr. Winterkorn issued a personal apology on Sunday.

The company is now subject to an EPA and U.S. criminal investigation and could face as much as $18 billion in fines.

A Volkswagen New Beetle is lifted at a plant in Germany. ENLARGE
A Volkswagen New Beetle is lifted at a plant in Germany. PHOTO: ASSOCIATED PRESS
The U.S. Justice Department’s Environment and Natural Resources Division has begun an investigation into the alleged cheating, people familiar with the matter said. The U.S. House oversight and investigations subcommittee on Monday said it planned to hold a hearing in coming weeks.

The U.S. scandal shocked Germany, where every seventh job is linked to the auto industry, and swept up rival car makers in its wake.

German Chancellor Angela Merkel on Tuesday called on Volkswagen to be “fully transparent” to quickly clarify the allegations.

FURTHER READING

Auto Software Enters Spotlight
Scandal Puts European Rivals on Offensive
EPA ‘Upping Its Game’ After Volkswagen Allegations
Short Answer: Volkswagen’s Emissions Scandal Spreads
Calls to Widen VW Emissions Probe
EPA Accuses Volkswagen of Dodging Emissions Rules
“Given the difficult situation, what is needed now is full transparency and to clarify the whole process,” Ms. Merkel told reporters in Berlin when asked if she feared the scandal could hurt Germany’s auto industry. “I hope all the facts will be put on the table quickly.”

German and French officials called for investigations into Volkswagen to be widened to include the entire auto industry as regulators begin to ponder whether such deception is more widespread.

Concerns that the scandal could lead to broader damage for the industry has hit the shares of car companies across Europe. Daimler AG, BMW AG, and French car makers Renault SA and PSA Peugeot Citroën have suffered sharp stock-market declines since the EPA announcement.

The state of Lower Saxony, a major Volkswagen shareholder with 20% of the car maker’s voting stock, said Tuesday that the emissions allegations raised doubts about tailpipe data published by all car makers.

France also called for a broader probe, suggesting a European-wide examination of the auto industry. “We need to do it at the European level,” French Finance Minister Michel Sapin said.

European Union regulators will meet with national authorities “very soon” to discuss how to address Volkswagen’s emissions crisis, an EU spokeswoman said on Tuesday.


The spokeswoman stressed that while the EU has a role in defining emission limits for cars, national authorities are responsible for enforcing those limits and the associated test procedures.

“That is a matter for the member states, who have all the tools they need,” she said. “We are there to provide the necessary political impulses.”

Elsewhere, Italy opened an investigation into Volkswagen’s emissions.

Italy’s Infrastructure and Transport Ministry said it is requesting information from both Volkswagen and Germany’s Federal Motor Transport Authority, which approves vehicles both for the domestic market as well as other European countries.

“The ministry is asking to know if the offense that occurred in the U.S., where there are different approval rules, was carried out also on approvals done by the German authority for Europe and if the vehicles were sold in Italy,” The Italian ministry said in a statement.