Volkswagen Names Matthias Müller CEO
Company veteran faces task of rebuilding car maker’s reputation, stock price

WOLFSBURG, Germany— Volkswagen AG on Friday confirmed the appointment of Porsche chief Matthias Müller as chief executive, capping a week in which Europe’s biggest car maker was engulfed by an emissions-testing crisis and lost a third of its market value.
The company’s major shareholders also announced the most sweeping corporate restructuring the German automotive giant has undertaken in decades. The restructuring, designed to streamline what has been criticized as an unwieldy decision-making process, had been in the works before the emissions crisis but took on heightened urgency.
Mr. Müller vowed to get to the bottom of an emissions scandal that has shattered trust in the firm and threatens to undermine its business at a time when key markets are weakening.
“My most urgent task is to win back trust for the Volkswagen group,” he said. “Under my leadership, Volkswagen will do everything it can to develop and implement the most stringent compliance and governance standards in our industry.”
The appointment came days after his predecessor, Martin Winterkorn, resigned under pressure after revealing that software used to dupe environmental regulators in the U.S. and Europe was installed on more than 11 million cars including its Volkswagen, Audi , Skoda and Seat brands.
The restructuring includes placing its 12 brands into four product groups. The VW brand will lead the passenger vehicles; Audi will lead premium vehicles; and Porsche will lead the luxury cars group that also includes Bentley and Bugatti. The commercial vehicle business with Volkswagen trucks, Scania and MAN has already created a holding company.
Volkswagen also restructured its business in North America, the epicenter of the emissions crisis, and changed the leadership of subsidiaries Skoda and Seat.
Winfried Vahland, 58, who transformed former communist-owned Skoda into one of the fastest-growing car brands in Europe, will run the VW North America business. Michael Horn, current head of Volkswagen of America, will report to Mr. Vahland.
Volkswagen has launched an internal investigation into the emissions scandal and has hired U.S. law firm Jones Day to conduct the investigation.
“We are going to wipe out all of our weak points,” said Mr. Müller.
In Charts: The Volkswagen Emission Scandal

ENLARGE

Volkswagen still seems uncertain about the details of the emissions scam, but has suspended a group of senior engineers pending proof of their innocence, said Berthold Huber, acting chairman of the supervisory board.
The engineers are Ulrich Hackenberg, father of Volkswagen’s innovative modular manufacturing system, Wolfgang Hatz, head of research and development at Porsche, and Heinz-Jakob Neusser, head of research and development at the Volkswagen brand.
They haven’t responded to requests for comment.
Ahead of the meeting, some people close to the company said the board would ask the three engineers to resign, but after some discussion the board decided to instead suspend them until it could determine whether they were involved in the emissions scam.


By choosing an insider such as Mr. Müller, Volkswagen’s shareholders and labor representatives have made clear that they want a CEO who is at home in the company’s culture, one that values reaching consensus between management and labor above simply maximizing profits.
The 62-year-old emerged the winner from a short list of candidates that also included Rupert Stadler, the CEO of Volkswagen’s luxury brand Audi, and Herbert Diess, a former BMW AG executive who joined the company in July and runs the VW namesake brand. Mr. Stadler remains in charge of Audi. Mr. Diess is viewed as a potential successor to Mr. Müller once he has gained more experience within the Volkswagen, people close to the company said.
“It’s too soon for Diess,” one of those people said.
Mr. Huber, former chief of the IG Metall trade union and currently Volkswagen’s acting chairman, said Mr. Müller is “a person of great strategic, entrepreneurial and social competence.”
VERSION 8515222
Long Road
Volkswagen, beset this week by a scandal over emissions-cheating software in some of its diesel models, has gone through many changes since its beginnings under Nazi Germany.
1 of 13


PHOTO: HOFFMANN/GETTY IMAGES
1934
Reich Association of the German Automobile Industry commissions Ferdinand Porsche, left, to design a Volkswagen, or people's car. Adolf Hitler is amused to find the engine in the model's trunk.
Volkswagen’s board has 20 members, equally divided between shareholder and labor representatives. The chairman comes from the shareholder bench and has two votes to break a tie. In Volkswagen’s case, Mr. Huber became chairman of the supervisory board when Ferdinand Piëch stepped down in April. A longtime union leader, his position as chairman is only temporary until a new chairman, who typically comes from the shareholders, is chosen.
Mr. Müller is also close to the company’s main shareholders, the Porsche and Piëch families, heirs of Beetle inventor Ferdinand Porsche. “We have worked together very long and in close confidence,” said Wolfgang Porsche, chairman of the company’s supervisory board. “The Porsche-Piëch family stands behind Volkswagen without any ifs, ands or buts.”