Volkswagen Posts Loss as Emissions Scandal Bites
German car maker issues profit warning for full year
Volkswagen swung to a $1.9 billion dollar third-quarter net loss and issued a full-year profit warning Wednesday, as VW's emissions-cheating crisis continues. William Boston explains what we can expect next from the German auto maker. Photo: Bloomberg

Volkswagen AG posted a €1.73 billion ($1.9 billion) third-quarter net loss and issued a full-year profit warning as the cost of righting itself from an emissions test scandal began to hit home.

Chief Executive Matthias Müller told investors on Wednesday that Europe’s largest auto maker would no longer chase growth at all costs in a bid to be the biggest car maker in the world. He promised to present a new strategy by the end of the year that balances sales gains with good governance and profitability.

“In this industry, size is important,” the recently named CEO said, “but the point is not whether Volkswagen sells 100,000 cars more or less than our competitors. Important is qualitative growth.”

Rival Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV also reported a third-quarter loss on charges to cover the costs of North American safety recalls and for unsold vehicles destroyed in an August explosion at a Chinese port.

The Italian-U.S. auto maker posted a net loss of €299 million compared with a net profit of €188 million a year earlier. Results included a €761 million pretax charge for Jeep and other recalls and a €142 million writedown from the China port explosion. Fiat Chrysler’s revenue advanced 17% over a year earlier to €27.47 billion in the quarter.

Volkswagen shares were up about 4% at €109.85 in Frankfurt trading while Fiat Chrysler shares fell about 2%, to €13.50, in Milan, both in 4 p.m. trading on Wednesday.

At Volkswagen, a central theme emerging from its September admission of cheating on U.S. diesel-car emissions tests is how the company’s naked ambition to overtake rivals Toyota Motor Corp. and General Motors Co. may have encouraged some top engineers to deceive customers and environmental regulators.

For the past eight years, Volkswagen has been on an aggressive campaign to overtake its rivals, spending billions to build factories from China to Chattanooga, Tenn., in what Mr. Müller’s predecessor called “Strategy 2018.”

That plan entailed more than just bulking up. For the first time in its history, Volkswagen set profit targets and other financial metrics to improve performance. But meeting targets was most identified with unit sales growth, gaining on rivals one car sale at a time, and each of the company’s big divisions developed its own growth plan.

VW Shares Higher; Traders Warn of Volatility

Volkswagen’s preferred shares are trading 3.2% higher after the release of third-quarter data. The German car maker posted a net-loss but investors seemed reassured as group revenue rises 5.3%. That said, the shares remain very volatile. “The stock is still a play thing of short-term oriented investors and fast trades,” a trader says.

Volkswagen Liquidity, 3Q Charge Reassuring, Says Evercore

It’s a good sign Volkswagen isn’t sharply increasing a third-quarter charge to cope with the cost of the emissions scandal, says Evercore ISI. “We see it as a positive signal that management has pretty much kept the provision for the diesel scandal unchanged,” the brokerage says. “The fact that the provision hasn’t spiraled materially higher is a good thing,” Evercore ISI notes. This and strong net liquidity should reassure investors it says.

Market Talk is a stream of real-time news and market analysis that’s available on Dow Jones Newswires

At the Volkswagen brand, the company’s biggest, the slogan was “Mach 18,” a play on words in German that could mean both achieving the 2018 targets and moving at 18 times the speed of sound.

Meanwhile at Audi, the company’s luxury car brand and a big contributor to profits, executives set out to overtake rivals BMW AG and Daimler AG with their “Audi 2020” growth plan.

Porsche AG, the tiny maker of sports cars, added mass-market sport-utility vehicles as part of its “Porsche 2020” program to build volume. Porsche has more than doubled in size, but its profit margin has slipped as less profitable small SUVs emerge as its biggest business.

Now, Mr. Müller wants to rebalance the company’s growth strategy and put a greater emphasis on repairing Volkswagen’s corporate culture and improving profitability. He has created a board post for an integrity officer and hired a compliance official from Daimler for the job.

After Volkswagen admitted to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency that it had cheated on U.S. emissions tests last month, several of the company’s key supervisory board directors learned of it in the news rather than hearing it straight from then-CEO Martin Winterkorn.

Volkswagen's admission that it used software to manipulate the results of emission testing to sidestep pollution standards in millions of cars has rocked the auto maker. And the figures involved are pretty staggering. WSJ's Dipti Kapadia explains the scandal in numbers. Photo: Getty Images
Mr. Winterkorn resigned under pressure last month and was replaced by his one-time protégé.

Mr. Müller, who only briefly attended the conference call Wednesday before leaving for a flight to China with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, told investors that Strategy 2018 delivered “impressive results” but that he would launch “a new strategy headed toward 2025” that will “add substantial new elements.”

Yet, beyond proclamations about pursuing a new playbook less focused on the “size matters” mantra, Volkswagen’s new A-Team said little about the one thing everyone on the call wanted to hear about: How did the crisis happen and how was Volkswagen going to dig itself out?

Max Warburton, an automotive analyst with Bernstein Research, published a scathing note to clients after the call. “VW STILL doesn’t seem to understand the magnitude of its problems, still doesn’t have a clear idea how to fix them and is slightly ‘in denial’ about it all,” he wrote. “One can sense that VW hopes this will all just go away soon. It won’t.”


The quarterly loss, Volkswagen’s first in more than a decade, compares with a net profit of €2.9 billion a year earlier. The loss was caused by a €6.7 billion charge to earnings to pay for a global recall of up to 11 million cars with software that can allow them to dupe emissions tests.

Were it not for the crisis, Volkswagen’s earnings report would have painted a picture of a company struggling with the gyrations of currency markets and turmoil in emerging economies, but one still on fairly solid footing.

Operating profit, excluding the hit to pay for the global recall, was €3.2 billion, about the same as a year ago. Sales revenue was robust, up 5.3% at €51.5 billion. Growth at the company’s leading car brands—VW, Audi, Porsche and Skoda—wasn’t stellar, but with the exception of SEAT, all of its car brands were profitable in the quarter.

ENLARGE
Fiat Chrysler confirmed its 2015 adjusted profit forecast of €1.2 billion on revenue up 15% to €110 billion