Toyota to Provide Additional Services to New York Customers Affected by Recent Recalls

February 24, 2010
TORRANCE, Calif., February 24, 2010 – Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A., Inc. today announced that it would provide additional services for New York Toyota and Lexus customers who are affected by Toyota’s recent recalls.
 
These services are available to Toyota and Lexus owners in New York affected by current recalls involving sticking accelerator pedals, floor mat pedal entrapment, anti-lock brake system software updates, and Tacoma front drive shaft inspection. These services are provided for customers concerned about driving their vehicle before the repair is completed. These services will be tailored to the owner’s individual circumstances and may include:
 
• Expediting scheduling of the repair.
• Pick up and return of the vehicle by a dealership representative.
• Driving the customer to the dealership or to his or her place of work.
• Where necessary, providing other alternate transportation for the customer, such as a  rental car, loaner vehicle, or taxi reimbursement for the reasonable period that the customer is unable or unwilling to use his or her car.
 
These services will be provided by Toyota through the dealers at no cost to either the owners of affected vehicles or the dealer.  Reimbursement of these expenses is separate from the stipends of $7,500 to $75,000 that the company already has provided to dealers in connection with the recalls.
 
Toyota has taken this series of steps based upon discussions with the Attorney General of New York, to address the concerns of government regulators and consumers in New York. 
 
Toyota dealers across the country are taking extra steps to complete the recall campaigns for customers as quickly as possible.  Many dealers are offering extended service hours, and some are staying open 24 hours a day.  Others are adding service and scheduling personnel, dedicating body shop capacity to expedite repairs, providing free car washes and oil changes, increasing owner communication, and providing complimentary maintenance service, among other customer-focused activities.
 
“Everyone at Toyota is focused on making the recent recalls as simple and trouble-free as possible for our customers, with dealers across the country making extraordinary efforts  to take care of Toyota owners,” said Jim Lentz, president and chief operating officer of Toyota Motors Sales, U.S.A., Inc.
 
“We are doing everything we can, as fast as we can, to make things right for our customers,” said Mr. Lentz.
 
As of February 20, 2010, more than 32,000 vehicles affected by the sticking accelerator pedal recall alone already have been modified in New York State.  Nationally, some 750,000 of the 2.3 million vehicles subject to the sticking accelerator pedal recall have been modified since the modification became available.  
 
Detailed information and answers to questions about issues related to these recalls are available to customers at www.toyota.com/recall and at the Toyota Customer Experience Center at 1-800-331-4331.