Matthias Müller unveils next steps for the Volkswagen Group
•	Support for customers top priority
•	Volkswagen looks beyond current crisis
•	New strategy to be unveiled in 2016

Matthias Müller, Chairman of the Board of Management of Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft, has announced the five key steps to realign the Group. “We have to look beyond the current situation and create the conditions for Volkswagen’s successful further development”, said Müller in Wolfsburg on Wednesday. He presented a five point plan that he intends to use so that Volkswagen remains one of the world’s leading automobile manufacturers in the future. Müller is confident that “Volkswagen will emerge from the current situation stronger than before”. He announced that the cornerstones of the Group’s Strategy 2025 will be presented next year.
The Volkswagen CEO explained that his top priority is to support the customers affected by the diesel issue. “Our customers are at the core of everything that our 600,000 employees worldwide do”, he said. According to Müller, Volkswagen is working intensively to develop effective technical solutions. In contact with the Kraftfahrtbundesamt (KBA – German Federal Motor Transport Authority) the implementation is set to begin in January 2016.
Müller’s second priority is to systematically drive forward and complete the investigation into what happened. “We must uncover the truth and learn from it”, he said, adding that Volkswagen is being extremely thorough in its analysis. For this purpose, audit firm Deloitte has been engaged in addition to the steps already announced. According to Müller, those responsible for what has happened must face severe consequences.
Müller’s third priority is to introduce new structures in the Volkswagen Group. “The key point is that Group management will be decentralized to a greater extent in the future”, he said, with more independence for the brands and regions. Müller stated that the Board of Management will focus on addressing cross-brand strategies, leveraging synergies and ensuring that Group resources are used effectively. “We will review in detail our current portfolio of more than 300 models and examine the contribution that each one makes to our earnings.”
As his fourth priority, Müller is driving forward a realignment of the Group’s culture and management behavior. He noted that the pursuit of perfection, the employees’ commitment and social responsibility in the Volkswagen Group must be retained. However, he believes that changes are necessary in how Volkswagen communicates and how it handles its mistakes. “We need a culture of openness and cooperation.” Müller also called on everybody at Volkswagen to display more courage, greater creativity and a more entrepreneurial spirit in their dealings with one another.
The Volkswagen CEO announced that the fifth priority will be to transform the Group’s Strategy 2018 into a Strategy 2025. “Many people outside of Volkswagen, but also some of us, did not understand that our Strategy 2018 is about much more than production numbers. A lot of things were subordinated to the desire to be “Faster, Higher, Larger”, especially return on sales.” According to Müller, the point is not to sell 100,000 more or fewer vehicles than a major competitor. Instead, the real issue is qualitative growth. Müller announced that the cornerstones of the Group’s Strategy 2025 will be developed over the coming months, and that it would be unveiled mid-way through next year. 

Volkswagen Group generates operating profit before special items of EUR 10.2 billion (EUR 9.4 billion) by the end of September
• Sharp year-on-year rise in sales revenue to EUR 160.3 billion (EUR 147.7 billion)
• Negative special items relating to diesel issue of EUR 6.7 billion and in trucks 
  business of EUR 0.2 billion
• Operating profit after special items at EUR 3.3 billion (EUR 9.4 billion)
• Full-year earnings forecast adjusted
• Equity-accounted profit of the Chinese joint ventures stable
• Additional liquidity in excess of EUR 3 billion from sale of Suzuki shares
• Net liquidity in Automotive Division increases to EUR 27.8 billion
• CEO Müller: “We will do everything in our power to win back the trust we have lost”

The Volkswagen Group generated an operating profit before special items of EUR 10.2 billion (EUR 9.4 billion) in the first nine months of the year. Sales revenue grew by 8.5 percent to EUR 160.3 billion. The operating return on sales before special items amounted to 6.4 percent. Earnings were impacted by charges of EUR 6.7 billion in the third quarter for forthcoming measures relating to the diesel issue. As a result, operating profit after special items amounted to EUR 3.3 billion (EUR 9.4 billion). Profit after tax was EUR 4.0 billion (EUR 8.7 billion). As already announced, the full-year earnings forecast was adjusted accordingly.
“The figures show the core strength of the Volkswagen Group on the one hand, while on the other the initial impact of the current situation is becoming clear. We will do everything in our power to win back the trust we have lost”, said Matthias Müller, Chairman of the Board of Management of Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft, in Wolfsburg on Wednesday.

The Group’s operating profit and sales revenue exclude the activities of the Chinese joint ventures, which are accounted for in the financial result using the equity method. The share of operating profit attributable to the Chinese joint ventures to the end of September remained level at EUR 3.8 billion (EUR 3.9 billion).

“The Volkswagen Group has very solid and robust liquidity resources. This will help us manage the challenging situation caused by the financial impact of the diesel issue”, said Chief Financial Officer Frank Witter.
Net liquidity rises in the Automotive Division

The Automotive Division’s net cash flow increased considerably year-on-year to EUR 11.8 billion (EUR 5.5 billion) thanks to the Group’s robust business model. Net liquidity in the Automotive Division amounted to EUR 27.8 billion at the end of September (end of December 2014: EUR 17.6 billion). The Automotive Division’s investments in property, plant and equipment, investment property and intangible assets, excluding capitalized development costs (capex) increased to EUR 7.3 billion (EUR 6.5 billion). The ratio of capex to sales revenue in the Automotive Division amounted to 5.3 percent (5.0 percent).

Brands and Business Fields

The Volkswagen brand’s operating profit before special items relating to the diesel issue rose to EUR 2.2 billion (EUR 1.7 billion). Positive effects from exchange rates, optimized sales revenue and costs, and the efficiency program more than offset the negative effects of the markets in South America and Russia.

Audi lifted operating profit to EUR 4.0 billion (EUR 3.8 billion) due to sales growth, positive changes in the mix and favorable exchange rate movements. Earnings were negatively impacted by high upfront investments in new products and technologies, as well as the expansion of the international production network.

Operating profit at ŠKODA increased to EUR 734 million (EUR 651 million), mainly due to mix effects, optimized material costs and more favorable exchange rates.

The SEAT brand’s operating profit rose to EUR 12 million (previous year: operating loss of EUR 82 million). This was mainly due to higher volumes, positive exchange rate effects and optimized costs.

Bentley generated an operating profit of EUR 57 million (EUR 125 million) due to lower vehicle sales and higher upfront expenditures. Exchange rate effects and lower costs were unable to offset this trend.

Operating profit at Porsche improved to EUR 2.5 billion (EUR 1.9 billion) due to volume and exchange rate effects. Porsche’s growth is uniform in the key global markets. Changes to the mix, increased structural costs and higher development costs had a negative impact on earnings.

Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles continued to renew its product range and posted an operating profit of EUR 313 million (EUR 378 million).

Scania generated an operating profit of EUR 748 million (EUR 700 million); this increase was primarily due to the service business and positive exchange rate effects. MAN’s operating profit before restructuring expenses amounted to EUR 271 million (EUR 304 million). The negative trends in the commercial vehicles market in South America weighed on earnings. Restructuring measures resulted in special items of EUR –170 million.
Operating profit at Volkswagen Financial Services amounted to EUR 1.4 billion (EUR 1.2 billion) on the back of positive volume and exchange rate effects.

Earnings forecast adjusted

The Volkswagen Group expects deliveries to customers in 2015 to remain on a level with the previous year in a persistently challenging market environment.

Depending on economic conditions, 2015 sales revenue for the Volkswagen Group and its business areas is expected to increase by up to four percent above the prior-year figure. However, economic trends in Latin America and Eastern Europe will need to be continuously monitored in the Commercial Vehicles/Power Engineering Business Area.

Because of charges related to the irregularities in the software used for certain diesel engines, we expect 2015 operating profit for both the Group and the Passenger Cars Business Area to be down significantly year-on-year. We expect an operating return on sales before special items of between 5.5 and 6.5 percent for the Group’s operating profit; this will amount to between 6.0 and 7.0 percent in the Passenger Cars Business Area.
