Toyota's U.S. Sales Skid; Ford Gains

The Wall Street Journal, Feb-03-2010 – DETROIT-U.S. auto sales rose in January as the economy strengthened, but results were tempered by Toyota Motor Corp., which suffered a sudden decline late in the month after a recall and a sales halt of more than half its vehicles. 


Toyota's monthly sales fell 16% from a year ago, dropping to less than 100,000 for the first time since 1999. 

The seasonally adjusted annualized selling rate for all car makers in January was 10.8 million cars and light trucks, marking the third consecutive year-over-year sales increase for the beleaguered auto industry, according to Autodata Corp. It was a substantial lift over January 2009's rate of 9.6 million, but less than in December when auto maker wooed customers with year-end fire sales. 

Overall, car makers sold 698,378 cars and light trucks in December, up 6.3% from January 2009, Autodata said. The 2009 month had two fewer selling days. 

Improving consumer confidence, economic growth and reduced joblessness helped bolster the market even as Toyota's troubles weighed on the industry. 

"There was more uncertainty in the marketplace by people who owned Toyotas," said Ken Czubay, Ford's vice president of U.S. marketing. "I don't think they made decisive moves from one dealer to another, it was more that people said they didn't know what they wanted to do." 

Toyota last week halted sales of vehicles that account for about 10% of the U.S. retail market while it worked on a fix for sticking gas pedals connected to unintended acceleration of some vehicles. The company announced Monday it has found a repair that should solve the problem and is shipping the fix to dealers this week. 

Toyota's share of the U.S. market fell to 14.1%, nearly four points lower than a year ago and the lowest since 2006, according to the company. 

Meantime, Ford Motor Co. reported a 24.4% sales increase from a year earlier, while General Motors Co. said sales rose 14.6%. 

A month earlier, Toyota passed GM in U.S. "retail" sales for the first time. On Tuesday, GM's chief sales analyst said the company is closing in on Toyota as again being the world's largest auto maker. 

Bob Carter, Toyota's group vice president and general manager, Toyota was on track to increasing sales in January until the sales stoppage. He estimated Toyota lost 20,000 sales as a result, but predicted the collateral impact on vehicles not involved in the recall will be limited. 

"We are fortunate to have a very strong brand," he said on a conference call with reporters. 
Analysts at Ford and GM said the controversy likely led many potential car buyers to hold off on a purchase until the issue is resolved. Toyota owners considering a new purchase were concerned about the trade-in value of their vehicles, they said, while potential Toyota shoppers may have postponed their decision.
