Toyota Sees Monthly Sales Decline

DETROIT—Toyota Motor Co.'s October U.S. sales fell from a year earlier, a senior executive said Monday while outlining the company's plans to deal with its struggles as the market begins to show signs of improvement.

Bob Carter, group vice president for the Toyota Division, said industry sales this year will likely be between 10.3 million and 10.5 million. The industry will likely pick up next year to around 11.5 million to 11.7 million sales, he said.

"We're seeing a good upswing in the second half that bodes well for the future," Mr. Carter told a gathering of journalists.

A visitor walks in front of Toyota Motor's 'IQ,' on display at the Tokyo Motor Show last month. ENLARGE
A visitor walks in front of Toyota Motor's 'IQ,' on display at the Tokyo Motor Show last month. EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY
Auto makers on Tuesday will release U.S. sales results for October. Analysts expect a slight rebound from September's anemic seasonally adjusted rate of 9.2 million vehicles after the end of the federal government's "cash for clunkers" program.

The clunkers program offered customers up to $4,500 to trade in old vehicles for new, more fuel-efficient models. More than 700,000 vehicles were sold with the rebates in July and August.

Mr. Carter said the company expects a "single-digit" decline in October sales compared with the same month a year earlier, when the Japanese auto maker sold 152,101 cars and trucks in the U.S. In September, Toyota's sales fell 13% from a year earlier, and in the first nine months of the year, the auto maker's sales dropped 28%, in line with the overall industry.

The expected improvement in October post-clunkers has fueled optimism among auto makers that a recovery has begun.

General Motors Co. said last week it expects to deliver the first year-over-year sales increase since January 2008. But Chrysler Group LLC, still scrambling to reinvent itself after bankruptcy, is expected to have a down month.

Toyota's Mr. Carter said the landscape of the U.S. industry will change as the recovery takes hold. Small cars will outsell full-sized trucks as fewer people buy big pickups for recreational use, he said.

Mr. Carter addressed the auto maker's recent problems, including its worst-ever financial performance and a massive safety recall. The auto maker's U.S. sales are down this year amid an industry downturn, and the company has been forced into a defensive position.

"Toyota has taken some jabs on the chin," Mr. Carter told reporters. "We exposed some rocks that we didn't know where there. We are optimistic about the future."

He also tried to squelch speculation that something other than improperly installed floor mats was behind a massive recall by Toyota to address unexpected acceleration of many of its vehicles. Other possibilities have been "thoroughly investigated" and ruled out, he said.

Mr. Carter said Toyota remains committed to investing in new vehicles and plans to launch new models for its youth-oriented Scion brand, which has experienced sharp sales declines. "We haven't served Scion well with its product life cycle," he said.

The brand is succeeding in drawing young buyers and converts to other Toyota brands, but Scion's three-model lineup is too limited.

"We need more than three models," he said.

