Toyota Shares Sink on LaHood Comments
Updated Feb. 3, 2010 1:20 p.m. ET
NEW YORK— Toyota Motor Corp. shares pared earlier declines after U.S. Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood said he had misspoke when he had advised in congressional testimony that people stop driving cars involved in Toyota's recall, advice that had initially caused a steep drop in Toyota's shares.

Testifying before the House appropriations committee, Mr. LaHood was asked what advice he would give to owners of Toyotas subject to the recall. "My advice is, if anybody owns one of these vehicles, stop driving it, take it to the Toyota dealer because they believe they have the fix for it," Mr. LaHood said.

His staff immediately sought to clarify the comments, and after the hearing Mr. LaHood said the remark was an "obvious misstatement." He said that he intended to urge Toyota owners to take their vehicles to dealers to have them examined and, if necessary, fixed.

Department of Transportation spokesman Bill Adams said in an email, "The DOT is advising owners of recalled vehicles to contact their local dealerships to arrange for fixes as soon as possible."

Toyota said on Monday it has the fix for the problem and would begin shipping the new parts to auto dealers. The Japanese auto maker said in a statement on its Web site that it "appreciated" Mr. LaHood's clarification.

Vote: If you were in the market to buy a car today, would you consider a Toyota?
Vote: How will the recall affect Toyota's reputation for quality?
"We want to make sure our customers understand that this situation is rare and generally does not occur suddenly. In the rare instances where it does occur, the vehicle can be controlled with firm and steady application of the brakes," the statement read. "If you are not experiencing any issues with your pedal, we are confident that your vehicle is safe to drive."

Toyota shares had been hovering closer to $75 after the opening bell but started falling more sharply after Mr. LaHood spoke. Some of the decline eased after the clarification; Toyota shares were down about 5.2% at $74.14 in afternoon trading. Since the recalls were announced, Toyota shares have declined 20%, wiping out more than $30 billion in market capitalization.

Mr. LaHood said he wants to talk directly with Toyota Chief Executive Akio Toyoda about the safety concerns involving Toyota cars and the company's handling of those issues.

"This is very serious," Mr. LaHood said at a breakfast with reporters in Washington. "After I talk with him, they'll get it. We're going to keep the pressure on."

Toyota last week had to halt production and U.S. sales of eight models in response to rising concerns that the vehicles could suddenly speed up on their own. It has issued two recalls totaling about six million vehicles to replace floor mats that can get jammed against the gas pedals, and gas pedals that can develop a tendency to get stuck in an open-throttle position.

The Transportation department is also investigating claims that the electronic throttle system may be partly to blame. Toyota has denied that is the problem.

There are plans for a congressional hearing focused on the Toyota recall by the House Energy and Commerce Committee, expected Feb. 25.

