Toyota Offers Free Transport During Recall Repairs
By KATE LINEBAUGH AND KATHY SHWIFF
Updated Feb. 26, 2010 7:13 p.m. ET
DETROIT—Toyota Motor Corp. said it would extend free alternative transportation to owners nationwide while their recalled vehicles are being repaired, after being pressured by lawmakers earlier this week to broaden the offering.

"Working in cooperation with attorneys general across the country, Toyota will be extending on a nationwide basis the additional services being provided to Toyota and Lexus customers in New York affected by the company's recent recalls," the company said in a statement.

New York Attorney General Andrew Cuomo Wednesday said Toyota had agreed to provide additional assistance to New Yorkers who own recalled Toyota vehicles.

In congressional testimony Wednesday, Yoshimi Inaba, head of Toyota's North America operations, indicated the Japanese auto maker would provide such assistance nationwide. But a Toyota spokeswoman said Mr. Inaba's statement represented the voluntary actions Toyota and Lexus dealers were taking across the country.

The Japanese auto maker Friday agreed to pick up and return the recalled vehicles from owners' homes at no cost. The free services are available to all owners in the U.S. of Toyota and Lexus vehicles affected by current recalls involving sticking accelerator pedals, floor-mat pedal entrapment, antilock-brake-system software updates and Tacoma front-drive-shaft inspection.

Toyota executives were grilled on Capitol Hill this week for problems with sudden acceleration after several fatal accidents. The company has recalled more than six million vehicles in the U.S. to try to address the problem. In testimony, Toyota executives said they were taking steps to restore consumer confidence in the company, which has long been hailed as a safety and quality leader.

Customers worried about driving their vehicles before the repairs are completed may seek additional help. The services will be provided by Toyota through its dealers.

California Attorney General Jerry Brown said earlier Friday that Toyota would offer California Toyota owners the same treatment as those in New York.

