With Eye on Its Reputation, Toyota Issues Repair for Pedal
DETROIT — Toyota, struggling to eliminate questions surrounding millions of its vehicles, announced a repair on Monday to stop gas pedals from possibly sticking and causing cars to speed up unexpectedly.The solution involves installing a steel reinforcement bar in the pedal assemblies of 2.3 million vehicles in the United States. Toyota has said it will provide replacement pedals to more than five million buyers whose cars were recalled over floor mats that could jam the accelerator.

“These two fixes solve the issues that we know of,” said James E. Lentz III, president of Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A.

The company said last fall that floor mats were the lone cause of the problem — but added in January that pedal assemblies could cause accelerators to stick.

Now, it is trying to assure owners and car shoppers that the matter is settled and to restore its credibility, which has been shaken more than in past recalls.

“If they’ve got it, great,” said Edwin M. Baum, head of the product and consumer litigation practice at Proskauer Rose in Manhattan. “If they haven’t got it, they have even bigger problems. Nobody knows right now.”

Even as Toyota announced the repair, it appeared somewhat at odds with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, with which it tangled last fall for mischaracterizing the agency’s response to the floor mat problem. Toyota said the repair would be adequate for the life of the vehicle. But in a statement, the agency said owners who received that repair also might receive replacement pedals later on.

The questions for Toyota are not likely to end. Two Congressional committee hearings are planned, beginning next week.

A spokeswoman for the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform said Toyota’s North American chief executive, Yoshimi Inaba, would attend its hearing on Feb. 10, along with Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood. That committee’s chairman, Edolphus Towns, Democrat of New York, has raised a series of questions about the recalls, while lawyers, safety advocates and some consumers have expressed their own doubts.

Specifically, many wonder whether the problem is in the electronic systems that now control many functions that used to be handled mechanically.

The shift to more computerized controls has made many vehicles, not just Toyotas, more difficult to fix in recent years. However, Mr. Lentz rebutted the notion that electronics were at fault, saying the systems had been “thoroughly tested.” He added, “It is not an electronics issue.”

Toyota told customers Monday that parts were on the way to dealers, whose staffs were being trained. The repair takes about 30 minutes, and Toyota said it would fix cars involved in the floor-mat recall at the same time.

The company said owners would have priority over vehicles on showroom lots, although dealers may begin repairing those, too. The company asked consumers to wait until they received letters from Toyota before contacting dealers for appointments.

Toyota suspended North American production this week on eight models involved in the sticking-pedal recall. It also stopped selling those cars, but said sales could gradually resume as vehicles were repaired.

Production is scheduled to resume next week, Toyota said.

The recalled models have pedals and sensors made by the CTS Corporation, a supplier in Elkhart, Ind., that differed slightly from parts made for Toyota by Denso, a Japanese supplier. None of the vehicles with the Denso version were recalled.

Some of the models in this month’s recall also were part of the November recall over floor mats. Among the vehicles covered in that recall, but not included in this month’s recall, are the 2004 to 2009 Prius hybrid and several Lexus models.

In several media appearances Monday, Mr. Lentz repeatedly apologized for the missteps.

“This is embarrassing for us, but it doesn’t necessarily mean that we have lost our edge on quality,” Mr. Lentz said. “Our reputation is based on safety.”

Toyota is involved in the biggest recall-related crisis in the industry since exploding Firestone tires on the Ford Explorer and other vehicles a decade ago.

But Mr. Lentz said the effect on sales could be “minimal” if Toyota handled its relationship with customers properly.

“The heat’s on now to make sure we do this right,” he added.

Kurt Schiele, the general manager of Elmhurst Toyota-Scion near Chicago, said his dealership had sold about 1,000 of the vehicles being recalled, and his staff planned to call each buyer to explain the repair and set up an appointment. Many already have called with questions.

“There’s a lot of fear that was struck into their hearts, but once they understood what’s going on, they felt a lot more comfortable,” Mr. Schiele said.

Analysts for Kelley Blue Book, which tracks prices for used cars, expect the average resale value of recalled Toyotas at auction houses and dealerships to drop 1 to 2 percent this week from levels before the recall.

The Toyota executive in charge of quality control, Shinichi Sasaki, told reporters in Nagoya on Tuesday that Toyota expected to see sales slow as a result of the recall and suspension of sales.

Recalls by Toyota in the past have triggered about a 20 percent fall in monthly sales before a gradual recovery he said. But the scale of the recent recall “was a cause for worry,” Mr. Sasaki said. “But our main concern is not about sales at all. It’s about regaining our customers’ trust,” he said.

The effect of the recalls on sales will be clear Tuesday, when automakers report monthly sales data. And shares of Toyota rose almost 5 percent on Tuesday on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.

Toyota has rebounded from crises before in the United States, where it first started selling cars in 1957.

Its original offering, the Toyopet, proved to be too underpowered for American highways, forcing the company to shut its operations and return two years later with a more powerful car.

“People forget about a lot of things,” said James P. Womack, an author who has written extensively about Toyota. “Betting against Toyota has been a good way to lose money.”

