Toyota’s Sales Fall as G.M. and Ford Gain

DETROIT — Toyota Motor on Tuesday estimated that it lost about 20,000 vehicle sales in the week since it halted sales and production of some of its most popular models.

Toyota’s United States sales decreased 16 percent last month, and its market share fell to 14.1 percent, its lowest level in four years. A year ago, Toyota’s share was 17.9 percent.

It was the first time Toyota sold fewer than 100,000 vehicles in a month since 1999.

Sales of the Toyota Camry midsize sedan, one of eight models affected by the more recent of two big Toyota recalls, declined 24 percent. Sales of the Tundra pickup truck dropped 45 percent.

Over all, sales of the eight models recalled Jan. 21 were 21 percent lower than in January 2009.

The decline was more than many analysts had expected, but rival automakers said the recalls had not caused their sales to increase significantly. Ford, General Motors and Chrysler are among companies offering $1,000 discounts to buyers who trade in Toyotas.

“In one week, we don’t think there was a heck of a lot of diversion,” G.M.’s chief market analyst, Michael C. DiGiovanni, said in a conference call with analysts and reporters. “But we’ll pick up more in February if it drags on.”

Photo

A customer, left, is shown preparing to test drive a Ford at Five Star Ford in Scottsdale, Ariz., last month. Credit Joshua Lott for The New York Times
Toyota is struggling to resolve the matter quickly and said its dealers would begin making repairs to customers’ vehicles this week. Dealers will be permitted to begin selling affected cars and trucks on their lots as soon as their pedals are fixed, but they are being told to focus on customers’ vehicles first.

Three of every five cars on dealers’ lots are not ready to be sold, Toyota said.

“Their problems could be short-lived,” said Michelle Krebs, a senior analyst with Edmunds. com, a Web site that provides car-buying advice to consumers. Edmunds said a measure of activity on its site that has a strong correlation to sales indicates a rebound in interest for Toyota since it announced a repair strategy Monday.

“Toyota has built up a lot of good will and brand equity, and they will bounce back from this,” Ms. Krebs said. “We at least see that people are still willing to buy Toyotas.”

But for January, Toyota was easily outsold by the Ford Motor Company, whose sales increased 25 percent. Ford, which ranked behind Toyota in 2009 sales, said it sold 43 percent more passenger cars than a year ago.

Ford’s market share jumped to 16.7 percent from 14.2 percent in January 2009.

Total sales of new vehicles increased 6 percent.

G.M. sales increased 14 percent, while Chrysler’s decreased 8 percent. Honda’s sales fell 5 percent. Nissan’s increased 16 percent.

Photo

Sam Bartlett examined an F250 Ford truck on a dealer lot in Frisco, Tex., in January, when Ford sales increased 25 percent. Credit Matt Nager for The New York Times
The big increases for Ford and G.M. were largely attributable to fleet operators, including car-rental companies and governments, ordering thousands more vehicles than they did a year ago, after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy caused credit markets to tighten. Ford said its fleet sales jumped 154 percent last month.

Ford said sales to individual customers declined about 5 percent, and G.M. said retail sales for the four brands it is keeping were up 3 percent. G.M. has stopped building vehicles for Pontiac and Saturn and is preparing to sell Saab and Hummer.

The Detroit companies, which steadily lost customers to Asian competitors for decades, hope to poach more disgruntled Toyota owners in February. But a Toyota executive, Bob Carter, said he thinks past customers and would-be buyers will stay with the company.

“Most of our consumers are confident in the brand,” Mr. Carter, the general manager of the Toyota division, said on a conference call. “If they’re in the market, they’re just delaying their purchases to see the outcome.”

The Jan. 21 recall covers about 2.3 million vehicles in the United States and an additional nearly 2.2 million elsewhere. Toyota said their accelerator pedals can become worn and difficult to operate or stick in a partly depressed position. North American production of the models in that recall is scheduled to resume next week, using newly designed pedals.

Toyota will repair finished vehicles by installing a steel reinforcement bar into the pedal assembly to reduce friction.

