Acceleration Incidents Cited on Repaired Toyotas

Federal regulators said Wednesday that they had received 10 reports of Toyota vehicles accelerating unexpectedly after they were repaired at dealerships.

The complaints have not been verified, but they add to questions about whether Toyota’s big recalls will resolve its problems with unexpected acceleration. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said it had begun to contact and interview the consumers who filed the reports.

“If Toyota owners are still experiencing sudden acceleration incidents after taking their cars to the dealership, we want to know about it,” the agency’s administrator, David Strickland, said in a statement.

Toyota said its United States dealerships had repaired more than a million vehicles since early February out of six million vehicles that have been recalled to fix problems with the accelerator pedal. More than two million vehicles in other countries have also been recalled.

In some cases, Toyota says the accelerator pedal can become hard to depress or stuck partly depressed, and in others the pedal could become trapped under the floor mat, causing the vehicle to speed out of the driver’s control.

Photo

Stewart Stogel, of Mount Vernon, N.Y., said that repairs to his 2009 Toyota Camry did not fix the acceleration problem. Credit Craig Ruttle/Associated Press
“We are confident that Toyota vehicles are safe, and we’re doing everything we can to ensure that our customers are satisfied with the rigorously tested recall remedies,” Brian R. Lyons, a Toyota spokesman, said in an e-mail message. “We are taking steps to quickly investigate these complaints.”

Several of the new complaints about problems in cars that have been repaired involve Camry sedans. The owner of a 2009 Camry said that on Feb. 25, two days after the car received the recall repair, it suddenly sped up and went into a ditch. The owner of a 2010 Camry repaired Feb. 12 wrote that the car accelerated into a snow bank five days later. Both drivers said they had tried to brake, but were unable to stop the car before going off the road.

As of this week, regulators said they had received reports of 52 fatalities and 38 injuries in incidents said to have been caused by unexpected acceleration of a Toyota. Three-quarters of the incidents were reported in the last four months, since Toyota began recalling vehicles for possible pedal entrapment.

Toyota executives testified this week to a Senate panel investigating the recalls that they were confident, as they had said since the recalls began, that the problem was caused by either the pedal or floor mats and not by the vehicles’ electronic throttle control systems.

“I want to be absolutely clear: As a result of our extensive testing, we do not believe sudden unintended acceleration because of a defect in our E.T.C.S. has ever happened,” Takeshi Uchiyamada, an executive vice president for Toyota, said. But Mr. Uchiyamada said Toyota would “continue to search for any event in which such a failure could occur.”

The complaints about repaired cars were reported Wednesday by The Los Angeles Times, which was alerted to them by Safety Research and Strategies, a Massachusetts consulting firm that has been compiling reports of unexpected acceleration in Toyotas.

