Toyota Acceleration Problem Is Still Unresolved

Floor mat The accelerator of a Lexus stuck on a floor mat.
Toyota said on Tuesday that a press release it issued on Monday was not intended to give the impression that the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration had cleared 3.8 million of its vehicles of having an unintended acceleration defect.

Indeed, the federal agency said it was still investigating the exact cause of the acceleration problem.

Toyota and the safety administration issued a warning in September to the owners of the Toyota and Lexus vehicles to remove the driver-side floor mat because it could jam the accelerator pedal. The warning was issued after the problem led to the death in August in California of four people in a Lexus. The company said in Monday’s release that it would send letters to vehicle owners warning that an unsecured floor mat could jam the accelerator.

But the release went further, implying that, apart from the floor mats, the agency found no other problem. Toyota wrote:

“The letter, in compliance with the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act and reviewed by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (N.H.T.S.A.) also confirms that no defect exists in vehicles in which the driver’s floor mat is compatible with the vehicle and properly secured.”

The wording is subtle, but it could give the impression that the safety agency had found no safety defect beyond errant floor mats. Some news articles certainly interpreted the release that way and reported that the mats were the only problem. But Karen Aldana, a spokeswoman for N.H.T.S.A., said the agency was still exploring other issues, including the design of the gas pedal and the vehicle’s floor pan.

“It goes beyond the floor mats,” Ms. Aldana said.

Toyota’s release comes as ABC’s “World News with Charles Gibson” and “Nightline” were preparing to air an investigation tonight into the acceleration problem, including owners who insist that floor mats were not the problem. (Here’s an ABC/Consumer Reports video on what to do if your car experiences unintended acceleration.)

John Hanson, a Toyota spokesman, said the company thought it was clear in the release that it was quoting its own letter to owners and not the safety agency.

“We are not saying that N.H.T.S.A. says there is no defect other than this,” he said.

Mr. Hanson said that letter to owners was approved by the agency, which Ms. Aldana confirmed, including a line that says: “Toyota has determined that this defect does not exist in vehicles in which the driver side floor mat is compatible with the vehicle and properly secured.”

So, the automaker felt it was O.K. to use that information in a press release posted on its Web, he said.

“I was hoping it wouldn’t be misleading,” Mr. Hanson said. “It is a very complicated situation.”

Yes, it is complex. The bottom line of all this confusion is this: Unsecured floor mats can jam the accelerator, and consumers have to make sure the mats are placed correctly. But there may also be further problems with the vehicles, and the N.H.T.S.A. is still investigating. So stay tuned for more announcements and hopefully clearer wording from both parties.

