LaHood Backtracks on ‘Stop Driving It’

By MARK LEIBOVICH and MATTHEW L. WALD
Published: February 3, 2010
WASHINGTON — Ray LaHood testified before a Congressional panel on Wednesday morning, something he had done many times before, and made points that — he thought — he had made many times before.


Mr. LaHood, the transportation secretary, was asked what guidance he would give to Toyota owners affected by a series of recalls.

“My advice,” Mr. LaHood said in his characteristically folksy tone, “is if anybody owns one of these vehicles, stop driving it. And take it to a Toyota dealer.”

He finished his remarks to a House appropriations subcommittee, then headed outside the hearing room, where it became clear that his testimony would be remembered for three words: “Stop driving it.”

When greeted by reporters, he immediately tried to modify his words. “What I said in there was obviously a misstatement,” Mr. LaHood said, adding that he meant to say, “If you own one of these cars, or if you’re in doubt, take it to the dealer.”

But by then, “stop driving it” had ricocheted over the airwaves, news wires and the Internet, sending Toyota shares into a temporary skid, and administration officials into scramble mode.

In Washington, it is fashionable to celebrate the plainspoken and bemoan the overly scripted public figure. Mr. LaHood, a plainspoken former Republican congressman from Illinois, became an advertisement on Wednesday for the virtue of remaining scripted.

Toyota expressed dismay at his comment, and a White House spokesman was compelled to say that President Obama had “full confidence” in Mr. LaHood — better than the alternative, but still never something a cabinet secretary wants to hear.

Even so, Wednesday’s events were a strangely typical day for Mr. LaHood, who has been known to jump the median line between refreshing straight talk and being overly blunt. While that tendency has won him praise for talking tough with industry leaders and putting state officials on notice about “getting their acts together” if they wanted to receive federal grants, he has drawn criticism inside and outside the administration for speaking too candidly — or, in the case of Wednesday, imprecisely.

Skyler McKinley, 18, a high school senior from Lakewood, Colo., who drives a 2007 Prius, said he was shocked when he first heard of the Toyota warnings. Wednesday’s events were hardly reassuring.

“What’s been coming from the transportation secretary has been a little ambiguous, to say the least,” he said.

Rahm Emanuel, the White House chief of staff, defended Mr. LaHood. “I think and the president thinks Ray’s been a great secretary.”

When he misspoke, Mr. Emanuel said, “he immediately realized he’d said it.” When some officials make an error like that, Mr. Emanuel said, “Usually these things take days. He did it in five minutes.”

Last May, soon after he started his job as secretary, Mr. LaHood told The New York Times that Mr. Obama did not put him in his post because he had any expertise in transportation issues, but largely because he was a close friend of Mr. Emanuel and could be helpful in reaching out to members of Congress, particularly Republicans.

Mr. LaHood’s lack of expertise has provoked criticism, but he also has been praised as someone who can better appreciate the concerns and hazards of drivers and passengers.

Since taking office, Mr. LaHood has won praise for taking steps to protect air travelers and highway drivers. In December, he ordered penalties for airlines that keep passengers in a plane on the ground for too long, and mandated the provision of food and water. He also instituted a rule in January banning texting by truck drivers while they drive, which won him a mention on “The Oprah Winfrey Show.”

“Typically, the transportation secretaries are mostly focused on infrastructure and they don’t have a chance to focus on driver behavior,” said Jonathan Adkins, a spokesman for the Governors Highway Safety Association, a group of state highway safety officials based in Washington. Mr. LaHood, though, has highlighted the dangers of sending text messages from behind the wheel, a campaign he called a “rampage” against driver distractions. “That’s unusual,” Mr. Adkins said.

Representative Edward Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, said that Mr. LaHood’s straightforward style reflects the middle-American city of Peoria that he represented in Congress for 14 years.

“He speaks for Peoria, and in a way that people in Peoria expect to be spoken to,” Mr. Markey said. Mr. Markey, the owner of a recalled Toyota Camry, said he appreciated Mr. LaHood’s candor. He said Wednesday’s confusion was largely driven by “overreaction” from Wall Street that he said was a common occurrence whenever traders acted on “fragmentary information about which they have little knowledge.”

Mr. LaHood has been outspoken in recent weeks as the Toyota problems have grown. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, part of his agency, appears to have been unusually aggressive, even dispatching its acting chief to Japan to talk to the company. And Mr. LaHood has not been shy in saying what his department has done. In an interview on WGN radio, he said “The reason Toyota decided to do the recall and to stop manufacturing is that we asked them to.”

At a breakfast with reporters on Wednesday, Mr. LaHood said he wanted to talk to Akio Toyoda, the company president and chief executive. Asked whether Toyota “gets it” and understands the significance of the safety problem, he replied, “I think they’re pretty close to getting it. The reason I’m going to talk to Mr. Toyoda, because after I talk to him, I think they’ll get it. This is serious. This is very serious. We’re going to keep the pressure on.”

