Justice Department alleges VW violated Clean Air Act
 Chris Woodyard, USA TODAY 5:18 p.m. EST January 4, 2016

The Justice Department filed a civil complaint Monday against Volkswagen alleging nearly 600,000 cars with diesel engines in the U.S. violate emissions laws and that many were imported in violation of the Clean Air Act.

The lawsuit was filed in Detroit on behalf of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, which worked with the California Air Resources Board in exposing the violations last year. VW has admitted to rigging cars with 2-liter diesel engines, and the EPA found violations in vehicles with 3-liter diesels as well.

The complaint alleges that the nearly 600,000 diesel engine vehicles built since 2009 were equipped with illegal "defeat devices" installed to impair emission control systems. That resulted in higher emissions than allowed by law. The lawsuit asks for penalties of up to $37,500 per car.

The suit also alleges that VW violated the Clean Air Act by importing vehicles into the U.S. that have far higher emissions than are allowed under their certification.

"Car manufacturers that fail to properly certify their cars and that defeat emission control systems breach the public trust, endanger public health and disadvantage competitors," said Assistant Attorney General John Cruden in a statement. "The United States will pursue all appropriate remedies against Volkswagen to redress the violations of our nation's clean air laws alleged in the complaint."

The suit was filed against Volkswagen corporate entities in Germany and the U.S. and its Audi and Porsche brands.

The EPA issued a statement saying the suit will hold Volkswagen accountable while it tries to reach a deal with the automaker on how to resolve the issue with recalls. However, EPA Assistant Administrator Cynthia Giles says the talks are not going well so far.

"With today's filing, we take an important step to protect public health by seeking to hold Volkswagen accountable for any unlawful air pollution, setting us on a path to resolution," she said in a statement.

The complaint says 499,000 cars equipped with the 2-liter, four-cylinder diesel engines were designed to exceed EPA clean-air standards for nitrogen oxides by up to 40 times the legal amount during normal driving. They were rigged with software to detect when they were being tested for emissions. Only then, while being tested, did their engines meet the standard.

In addition, it says Volkswagen Group equipped 85,000 vehicles with 3-liter six-cylinder diesel engines to also beat emissions tests by operating in a "temperature conditioning" mode. At other times in normal driving, the VW, Porsche and Audi vehicles spewed nitrogen emissions at up to nine times the EPA permitted level.

Legal experts say the complaint could be followed up by a criminal complaint later once investigations, both by VW and regulators on both sides of the Atlantic, are complete.

"You seldom see a large and sophisticated corporation engaged in environmental fraud," says Daniel Riesel, an attorney specializing in environmental law in New York. "It's very important that the federal government did bring suit," as it's "a statement that this is a serious environmental violation."

Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond, says the lawsuit sends a message that VW needs to find a solution. "Maybe patience has run out and the U.S. government really wants to put some pressure on to move this along," he says.