Volkswagen: Engineers couldn't meet U.S. emissions laws
Nathan Bomey, USA TODAY 11:16 a.m. EST December 10, 2015




Volkswagen AG Chief Executive Officer Matthias Mueller speaks exclusively to Bloomberg's Hans Nichols in his first television interview since becoming CEO. Bloomberg

Volkswagen investigators have determined that engineers cheated U.S. emissions tests in part because they could not figure out how to meet the standards, the company said today.

Volkswagen Group Chairman Hans-Dieter Potsch told reporters that engineers erred by developing manipulative software to fool regulators because they "quite simply could not find a way to meet the tougher" limits for nitrogen oxide pollutants in the U.S.

"We are not talking about a one-off mistake, but a whole chain of mistakes," he said at a press conference in Germany that was live-streamed online and translated into English.

Potsch said engineers should have persevered until they found a solution. He said the company has suspended nine managers who were "possibly involved in the manipulations" and the company is "relentlessly searching for those responsible for what happened."

He pledged to assign emissions certification to independent auditors in the future.


MYCENTRALJERSEY
Branchburg sets forum to discuss affordable housing

The company will also form a new committee to authorize new emissions software to avoid future violations. Volkswagen has admitted to fitting up to 11 million diesel vehicles worldwide with software that cheated tests for NOx emissions, allowing the harmful pollutants to be emitted at rates of up to 40 times Environmental Protection Agency standards.

Volkswagen CEO Matthias Mueller said the company is still pursuing a fix for the U.S. vehicles involved in the crisis — nearly 600,000 diesel cars and crossovers, such as certain versions of the Passat, Beetle, Audi A6 and Audi Q5 — due to the complexity involved.

In Europe, where the fix is not as complicated because nitrogen-oxide emissions regulations are less strict, recalls will begin in January.

The episode is expected to cost the company tens of billions of dollars, but Mueller said Volkswagen stock gains in recent weeks show investors have confidence in the automaker.

"Obviously, people believe that we have the situation under control," he said.


USA TODAY
Timeline: North Korea and the Sony Pictures hack

Analysts say the company has sustained serious damage to its brand — particularly in the U.S., where sales fell 25% in November — although sales in Europe have been more resilient.

The German automaker called the press conference to provide an initial update on its investigation into its emissions scandal, which is being led by global law firm Jones Day.

Potsch said 450 people externally and internally are involved in the episode. They have gathered 102 terabytes of data, equivalent to about 50 million books.

"The sheer number is indication that we are taking this very seriously and seeking conclusive results as soon as possible," he said.

Peter De Lorenzo, a former auto industry marketing executive and editor of Autoextremist.com, said Volkswagen cultivated a "culture of fear" that nudged engineers to "do whatever they had to do to say that they met the standards."

"They’re saying they’re in pursuit of the people who did this — I don’t think that really means anything to anybody at this point. I think their image is taking a devastating hit," De Lorenzo said.

Potsch declined to identify any individuals involved in the scandal but said the company would provide a broader update at its annual meeting April 21. He said about 2,000 employees have been ordered to preserve records for investigators.

The company is facing a litany of probes, including a U.S. Justice Department criminal investigations, and many lawsuits.

Potsch acknowledged that "personal failures on the part of individual employees" as well as "flaws in some of our own processes" and "an attitude in some units of the company that tolerated breaches of rules" were to blame.

Mueller said the company is "speeding" its already announced decentralization of its global structure, giving more decision-making authority to regional leaders and reducing the influence of the Wolfsburg, Germany, headquarters.

He said he still believes there's a future for diesel vehicles, but Volkswagen will still press ahead with a plan to introduce 20 electric vehicles or plug-in hybrids by 2020.