Cost of Volkswagen scandal: 'Enormous but manageable'
Nathan Bomey, USA TODAY 4:18 p.m. EDT October 28, 2015

Volkswagen executives on Wednesday signaled that the cost of the automaker's emissions scandal will mushroom but indicated that the company can absorb the blow.

New Volkswagen CEO Matthias Mueller, speaking to American reporters in a conference call, pledged to overhaul the company's operations, expose wrongdoers and chart a new global strategy.

His statements came amid signs that the company's core business is weathering the crisis despite an avalanche of negative publicity and investigations into the company's acknowledgment that it installed software on up to 11 million vehicles worldwide to cheat emissions regulations.

Mueller acknowledged that the $7.3 billion in provisions that Volkswagen set aside in the third quarter to address the costs of the scandal will cover only fixes. That figure does not include the cost of penalties and potential customer compensation, executives said.


USA TODAY
Volkswagen posts $1.83 billion quarterly loss

That means the bill for the scandal could technically escalate to more than $25 billion if the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency levies its maximum $18 billion fine against the world's second largest automaker. Plus, the company it being hit by class-action lawsuits that could cost even more.

The company declined to offer a specific estimate for the total bill of the scandal. It will be "enormous, but manageable," the company's new financial chief, Frank Witter, told reporters.

Volkswagen swung to a $1.8 billion loss for the third quarter, officials said Wednesday. A net loss was an almost unthinkable possibility until the EPA exposed the scandal on Sept. 18, but investors were relieved that the company said its underlying sales and profitability remain strong.

Sanford Bernstein analyst Max Warburton — whose assessments of the European auto industry carry significant weight among investors — said in a research note that Volkswagen's 6.2% operating profit margin was better than expected and that there appears to be no long-term effect on the company's operating earnings.

But he still blasted Volkswagen for confusing statements about the emissions scandal and said it seems clear the company does not have a good sense for how much the scandal will cost.

"To be kind, we could conclude that VW is following the 'stop digging' section of the crisis management handbook — and that it is not going to say much in public until it agrees a plan with regulators on both sides of the Atlantic," Warburton wrote. "A harsher interpretation would be that VW still doesn't seem to understand the magnitude of its problems, still doesn't have a clear idea of how to fix them and is slightly 'in denial' about it all."

Mueller said the company is examining the future of every vehicle model in its lineup and will overhaul its corporate strategy.

Mueller, new to the role after the ouster of longtime CEO Martin Winterkorn, acknowledged that "the CEO does not usually participate in quarterly earnings calls," but described his participation as "imperative to share my view of the situation and the key priorities we have set ourselves."

He apologized to U.S. shareholders of Volkswagen, who "have had to endure considerable pain, for which we are deeply sorry."

The company's stock rose 4% to $109.35 in Germany as investors clung to the strong operating performance and signs that customers aren't abandoning the company. The shares have still lost more half of their value from their 52-week high.


USA TODAY
Volkswagen owners can check database to see if their car is affected

Mueller on Wednesday also:

•  Pledged to leave "no stone unturned to find out what exactly happened and to ensure nothing like this happens again."

The company has hired law firm Jones Day to probe its handling of the matter and is also facing numerous other investigations, including a U.S. Justice Department criminal probe.

"We will be ruthless in punishing those involved and we will be comprehensive in learning from it so that something like this never happens again," Mueller said.

• Volkswagen will cultivate "a culture that really promotes openness" and gives regional operations more responsibility to make their own decisions, instead of simply taking directions from the German headquarters.

There's "a great need for change," he said, "in how we communicate with each other, in how we collaborate within the group, in our understanding of leadership, in how we deal with problems and mistakes."

But said the culture change must be "organic" and not "top-down."

• The automaker is developing a new corporate strategy through 2025 to replace the company's 2018 vision. He said "we can be proud of" the 2018 plan, which charted a goal of becoming the world's largest automaker.

"However the world is changing, and so must we. We must strive to shape the future of the automotive industry," Mueller said. He declined to offer a preview except to say it will include more electric vehicles. The strategy will debut in 2016.

The plan appears to include a softening of Volkswagen's goal of retaining the largest automaker title, which the company seized from Toyota for the first six months of the year before relinquishing it again after the third quarter.

"Size is and continues to be important," Witter said. "But let me be very clear. At this point, whether Volkswagen sells a hundred-thousand units more or less than a major competitor is not an issue. We are struggling for qualitative growth."

• Volkswagen will reduce the number of board members providing oversight for corporate governance and brands